From Brown, Michelle P. _A Guide to Western Historical Scripts from Antiquity to 1600_. University of Toronto Press, 1993.

### p. 80

	The Gothic System of Scripts is a complex hierarchy of formal and cursive scripts developed from _s._ xii(ex)-_s._ xvi (and later in conservative areas). Its principal initial characteristics are the formation of distinct categories of script suited for use in a well perceived hierarchy of books and texts, from _de luxe_ liturgical volumes to university textbooks, and the rediscovery of cursive scripts proper (as opposed to tjhe dual purpose of Caroline and Prothogotic), initially (from _s._ xii(ex) in England which was the first area to re-invent cursive) for documentary use, but also for book use from _s._ xiii(ex). These scripts were used in a secular production context (in which clerics often participated) and the monastic scriptorium alike.
	From _s._ xii(ex.) the tendency towards lateral compression noted in Protogothic _textualis_ became more extreme and was accompanied by a squarer, more compact aspect and increasing elaboration in the treatment of minims. The latter feature was the determinant in a descending hierarchy of four grades of _textualis_ [...]
	During _s._ xii(ex) Protogothic semicursive developed in England, probably in the royal chancery, into a fully rediscovered cursive (_curisva anglicana_), with linking of letters and the introduction of features such as loops. Speed was not the only production crtierion, style, with its ability to impress, was also a factor, entailing the introduction of a number of decorative features which changed in fashion throughout the period and may assist dating. Cursive developments also occurred on the Continent and by _s._ xiv(in) the French chancery had perfected a distinctive 'prickly' cursive termed Secretary. This was introduced into England and Germany (which had already adopted some cursive elements into its _littera carolina documentaria_) from _c._ 1375 and co-existed with other scripts. Other areas developed their own cursive features, often with reference to these scripts. From _s._ xiii(ex) cursives were also used for books, especially in the context of professional university book production which helped to disseminate influences and generalize trends throughout much of Europe.

### p. 81

	With the acceptance of cursive for book use a predictable scenario of contamination of scripts occurs, termed 'bastard' or 'hybrid'. Neither of these terms is without difficulties, for they have also been applied to more specific scripts. 'Bastard' is the term preferred here to denote a script of mixed _textualis_ / _cursiva_ parentage (for example, Bastard _Anglicana_ and Bastard Secretary) [...] The relative degree of admixture determines classification, with _anglicana formata_ representing the most formal expression of English cursive script, whilst Bastard _Anglicana_ fuses the rounded loops and certain distinctive letter-forms of _cursiva_ (_bâtarde_) [...].
	In England _cursiva anglicana_ and Secretary continue in use, often contaminating each other, into _s._ xviii within certain administrative contexts and within everyday handwriting [...].

### p. 97

During the first quarter of the fourteenth century _cursiva anglicana_ underwent several significant developments which in many respects represented a simplification and clarification of script, following the stylistic extravagances of _s._ xiii(2).

### p. 98

By the end of the thirteenth century English cursive script (_cursiva anglicana_ and _anglicana formata_), which was already undergoing the process of relative simplification described in Plate 35, was used for books as well as documents. [...] _Anglicana formata_ represents the most formal expression of cursive script (without actually amalgamating with _textualis_ book script) and was particularly suitable for use in certain types of book production, especially those which demanded rapidity combined with a modicum of style.