In the 1340s a scribe in Ludlow compiled a curious collection of Middle English, Anglo-Norman, and Latin texts, with both prose and verse works that range from somber religious allegory to bawdy fabliau. The scribe then attached his miscellaneous folios to two older booklets of Anglo-Norman religious writing (a previous scribe's work) and formed the manuscript now known as Harley 2253. Harley 2253 is a decidedly multilingual manuscript--Middle English, Latin, and Anglo-Norman texts alternate regularly, several pages contain two or three languages side-by-side, and there are even some bilingual and trilingual poems in the collection. The polyglot manuscript is fertile ground for comparative literary analysis, whether scholars are interested in historicizing a multilingual 14th century England, exploring genres and themes across multiple languages, or tracking linguistic interplay and influence. But in the 20th century, the English, French, and Latin texts were never edited alongside each other. Instead, the Middle English texts were edited separately, and the Latin and Anglo-Norman texts were largely ignored. Even a facsimile of the manuscript omitted the first two booklets (containing the Anglo-Norman texts copied by a different scribe). The Middle English lyrics were given special attention, and although the manuscript actually features more Anglo-Norman poems, "Harley Lyrics" became shorthand for the Middle English lyrics alone. Scholarly analysis reinforced the decisions of scholarly editions and vice-versa: as the "Harley Lyrics" became a cornerstone of the Middle English canon, the manuscript itself was considered primarily significant for its unique and extensive collection of secular Middle English lyrics. Thus a distinctly multilingual manuscript was for decades edited and studied almost exclusively for its monolingual holdings, while little attention was given to its larger structural, thematic, and cross-linguistic meaning.

Significant work has been done in the past twenty years to correct this initial editorial bias, including a momentous edition of the entire manuscript and a collection of essays which considers "the manuscript as a whole" (cite). But the editorial history of Harley 2253 demonstrates the benefits and compromises behind any edition of a manuscript. By collecting the Middle English Harley lyrics together, editors directed attention to a previously overlooked branch of medieval English literature. By overlooking the Anglo-Norman and Latin texts in the manuscript, editors also cut off investigations into cross-linguistic and manuscript-level studies. Such advantages and constraints are inherent to the process of transforming manuscript to print, and indeed inherent to any form of *remediation*--that is, the "the representation of one medium in another" (45). Remediation always affords certain conveniences (e.g. legibility, access, thematic considerations) at the expense of certain information (e.g. page layout, material, handwriting, structure). This is not to say that certain kinds of mediums or editions are objectively superior to others. Rather, it is critical to be aware of the shifting balance between information and convenience behind any remediation--to be aware, for example, when selecting for convenience that we foreclose certain information.

The digital era has ushered in a whole new set of mediums for representing manuscripts--digital facsimiles, digital editions, isolated images of manuscript pages and illustrations. As with print, these new mediums raise questions about how to best represent manuscripts across different contexts and for different purposes. But the digital era is also introducing new **processes** of remediation--that is, changing not only the medium through which we reproduce manuscripts, but the method by which we do so. Editors can rely on digital images rather than a physical manuscript; the internet allows scholars to more easily collaborate on editions; some research teams are even crowdsourcing transcriptions. And the next form of remediation may well be the machine itself.

Thanks to advancements in Optical Character Recognition (OCR), several research teams (including our own) are successfully beginning to train machines to transcribe medieval scripts. The potential benefits of automatic transcriptions are manifold--quick and large-scale transcriptions of understudied manuscripts, keyword searches on digital facsimiles, less human error. In this paper, we discuss our method for training an OCR system as well as our promising results. But we also discuss important considerations for any team embarking on an automatic transcription project, as well as what this experiment may teach us about manuscript studies in general. Rather than viewing automatic transcription as an extreme departure from the history of manuscript studies as we know it, we suggest understanding this moment as any other layer in a manuscript's editorial history. As with previous mediums, while there are many potential benefits to automatic transcription, there are also various constraints demanded by the process, which we also discuss in this paper.

But while there are many constraints to automatic transcription, machine learning also affords an opportunity to reconsider the remediation of manuscripts in general. Data science and related fields--artificial intelligence, machine learning, etc---are increasingly concerned with probing the ways we manipulate data and train implicit biases into machines. When training a machine to transcribe a manuscript, one is forced to carefully consider the rules and standards behind transcription itself. Thus, as we move towards machine-made transcriptions, questions about scholarly bias are perhaps more important than ever.

Moreover, just as argue for viewing current OCR projects as a discrete moment in manuscript history, so we suggest readings manuscript history through the lens of data science and machine learning. Returning to Harley 2253, we can think about this manuscript's editorial history in terms of data manipulation and remediation bias. In plucking the Middle English lyrics out of their original context and presenting them as a homogenous set, scholars mined the manuscript for relevant data and discarded the rest. They manipulated the manuscript's data according to a certain bias--in favor of Middle English and prejudiced against Latin and Anglo-Norman. Even the facsimile edition--typically considered a transparent remediation--distorted data by leaving out the first two quires, reflecting a bias in favor of single scribes. Of course, this is what all editions *are*--selections, curations, manipulations. Though Harley 2253's history may be exemplary, any medieval manuscript's editorial history is a history of data manipulation. Below, we discuss the ways in which we manipulated manuscript data to produce automatic transcriptions, as well as the ways in which human transcriptions have always been manipulating manuscript data.

---
notes:

ocr as a moment in book history -- one which constrains us in a certain way and opens us up in a different way, one which offers certain questions (is it better automate transcriptions? how much of the manuscript should we render on the screen? is there a benefit to digital renderings of abbreviations -- i.e. fully diplomatic transcriptions?)
book history through data science -- as always biased and manipulative


(footnote) (Fein *Studies in the Harley Manuscript* 10).
MLA (Modern Language Assoc.)
Bolter, J.David, and Richard Grusin. Remediation : Understanding New Media. The MIT Press, 1999.

save for conclusion?

Machine learning requires researchers to be precise and thoughtful about their training data: when the training data is manuscript transcriptions, medievalists have to consider transcription decisions carefully. Especially as more medievalists begin to experiment with OCR, it is crucial that we consider our transcription decisions. But even outside machine learning, and simply within medieval studies, this experiment raises important considerations and forces us to reconsider the biases and decisions that undergird manuscript studies in the first place.
