## Our experiment -- method

In order to assess the feasibility and scalability of automatic transcription for medieval manuscripts, we decided to experiment with a pre existent OCR software—Kraken—on a small corpus of Middle English manuscripts. *Kraken* is a turn-key OCR software developed by Ben Kiessling, originally created to transcribe Arabic texts. Conventional OCR systems operate by learning individual letter forms, but since Arabic is a connected script, it requires a system that transcribes larger strings of text. Kraken uses a neural network to recognize text without first segmenting it into words and letters, and has proven very effective at transcribing Arabic. Since medieval handwriting often features non-discrete letter forms, and therefore poses similar challenges as connected scripts, we decided that Kraken would be a fitting program to use. Kraken has the added benefit of being completely open-source, so we could experiment with our models without waiting for another team or company to run the training for us.

After selecting an OCR software, we chose a manuscript for training. In order to optimize accuracy, we looked for a manuscript which would be most legible to the machine: this meant a manuscript with little decoration or damage, straight rubrications, and a neat script with distinguishable characters. Oxford Corpus Christi MS 198 was an ideal candidate for our training set: a *Canterbury Tales* manuscript, it was copied between between 1410 and 1420 by a certain "Scribe D." [footnote] Scribe D was on of the most prolific scribes of the late 14th century and early 15th century in England, and his handwriting is also considered to be one of the highest quality hands of the period (Doyles and Parkes 196). He writes in Anglicana Formata, which was the standard bookhand for medium and high-end Middle English manuscripts (until the continental-derived Secretary script came to compete with it in the fifteenth century). Anglicana Formata encompassed letter forms drawn from other medieval scripts, such as Gothic, documentary, and Secretary, and so its ductus poses similar challenges to automatic transcription as other medieval hands (such as the loops and slants of documentary with the minims and compressions of Gothic). However, Anglicana Formata is also an extremely legible Middle English bookhand: its minims are easier to discern than Gothic Formata and its characters are more discrete than documentary and Secretary hands. MS 198 itself has little decoration, clear rubrication, and a very neat script. Scribe D has the added benefit of working in the same professional circle as several other prominent London scribes (most famously as one of five scribal hands found in the Trinity Confessio Amantis (MS R.3.2)) [footnote:]. Thus, a model based on Scribe D could be tested specifically on the scribes within his professional circle to assess the applicability of a single-scribe model to similar scribes. Finally, we were able to download high-resolution images of MS 198 via the _Early Manuscripts at Oxford University_ project; most high-resolution images of manuscripts are not available to download and can be prohibitively expensive to order in bulk from institutions.

In selecting a clean manuscript in a single language with an extremely neat hand, we avoided many of the obstacles which loom largest over automatic transcription (e.g. rips, stains, obscure handwriting). But our training data also reflects a bias towards Middle English and a single scribe. While it makes sense to begin with "easier" manuscripts--most students of paleography start by reading the most legible manuscripts--there is still a

We also selected separate manuscripts for testing once training was complete. We desired to


We applied a similar bias to our test manuscripts, which we selected for their common script and similar historical and geographical background. However our test manuscripts were

For testing manuscripts, we aspired to concentrate on scribal differences alone; to minimize the effect of other factors, these hands should have shared a common script, and a similar historical and geographical background. We tested the resulting model on four other manuscripts: two attributed to him (the Trinity Confessio Amantis itself; and London, Brit. Lib., MS Harley 7334), one attributed to Scribe B—possibly Adam Pinkhurst—(Cambridge, Trinity College, B.15.17), and one by an Anonymous scribe (Corpus Christi 201). We selected these particular manuscripts because we hoped to assess extent a machine trained on the hand of one scribe could also satisfactorily transcribe texts written in a different hand. Because of the well-attested collaboration within the group of scribes to which Scribe D belonged, we could assume a spatial and chronological proximity between him and Scribe B, and—perhaps—an attempt to uniform their script. We also decided to experiment with a scribe outside this professional circle whose hand is still Anglicana Formata; therefore we added Corpus Christi 201, whose scribal hand is significantly different from Scribe D and his professional circle, even if he is writing in the same time period in the same general script.

[also talk about the testing as a kind of bias]
